# Gameplay

## Basics

### Tenets

**Immersion** - Every element must serve to bring the player deeper into the experience

**Role-play** - The player must be able to take up the role they want to take on.

### Fundamentals

**FPS Camera**:

+ The camera is first person.

**PAC Interactivity**:

+ The view can be switched from mouse-move to stationary for point and
click functionality.

**Prose Box**:

+ The prose box has information about everything that happens that needs
narration, from interactions, to combat, to literal observation the
character makes.

### Essentials

**Mindfulness**

If you just meander and wander without purpose, you won't get anything
worth while.

Condition the player to engage in the systems.

**Quality over Quantity**:

+ Everything should be deliberate.

+ Character Creation aspects should add variety, not just increase stats.

+ Allow for interesting moments.

+ Player Agency vs World Forces

+ Minimize railroading.

+ While the player isn't the sole agent, they should have reasonable agency.

+ Every area begins and ends as they are. They don't level with the player. If they player can't get through, they can't get through.

+ The player drives the plot, not the opposite.

+ Choice and Consequence

+ Always have an alternatives to combat, de-prioritize it.

+ Make the choices understandable and the consequences logical.

+ Make moral ambiguity through execution over ideology, and make it so that players can disagree on what's right while they can still agree on what's wrong.

**Guidance**:

Make the next step understandable. Only use markers if they make sense.

Make sure there is an in-game way to find everything in the game. No
wiki should be needed to find content.

**Progress**:

Progression Should be Horizontal over Vertical: meaning interesting
differences over stat increases.

Make in-lore, non-advancement-point ways to progress the character.

**Combat**:

Make combat have weight and attacks non-spamming.

Make the Enemies need consideration to be defeated.

Make the enemies learned from experience or context clues.

### Ideology

Anarchism

Opposition to hierarchy

Marxism

Critique of capitalist class structure

Praxis

Execution of ideals

## Character

### Build

##### 1^st^ Degree

Attribute

What basic range of actions the character is inherently good at.

Skill

What specific actions the character is learnedly good at.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Background

What the character's history is.

Lineage

Where the character's ancestry lies.

Discipline

What expertise the character is trained in.

### Person

##### 1^st^ Degree

Age

How old the character is.

Gender

What the character presents as.

-Masculine

-Androgynous

-Feminine

### Extra

##### 1^st^ Degree

Trait

Passive, thus always effecting the character.

Ability

Active, thus takes the form of an action or a temporary trait. Always
has a cool-down.

Aptitude

Proficiency in something, used for checks.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Fact

Effects the plot of the adventure and the players role-playing.

Class

What social position the character is in.

-Statesman: Those who command government. (Unplayable)

-Proprietor: Those who own property.

-Travailer: Those who work to survive.

-Slave: Those who are owned as property. (Unplayable)

Goal

A goal in the game that the character can complete for a bonus.

### States

##### 1^st^ Degree

Dead:

Incapacitated:

Defeated:

## Leveling

### Basics

##### 1^st^ Degree

Advancement Points

There are no levels, just advancement points earned through acts.

The currency the character uses to increase their stats

Acts that give advancement points are:

-Completing Quests

-Defeating Certain Enemies

-Learning Certain Information

-Performing Certain Feats

##### 2^nd^ Degree

When the character is created, they can use their initial advancement
points to select:

-Lineage

-Discipline

-Background

-Class

-Traits

-Abilities

-Facts

-Goals

When the character gains advancement point, they can use their earned
advancement points to increase or gain:

-Attributes

-Skills

-Resources

-Traits

-Abilities

-Facts

##### 3^rd^ Degree

PC can also change these through in-game means:

-Discipline

-Class

-Attributes

-Skills

-Resources

-Traits

-Abilities

-Aptitude

-Facts

-Goals

## Other Stats

### Resource

#### Stats

##### 1^st^ Degree

Health

Decides whether the character is alive or not.

Stamina

Decides whether the character can perform certain physical actions.

Ardor

Decides whether the character can perform certain mental actions.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Energy

How well rested a character is.

Nourishment

How well fed a character is.

Wait

Stamina regains points.

Rest

Ardor and Stamina regains points.

Heal

Health, Ardor, and Stamina regains points.

Injuries

Different injuries effect the character in different ways. Some are
permanent.

##### 3^rd^ Degree

Treatment

Removing injuries.

Illness

Different illnesses effect the character in different ways.

Cure

Removing illnesses.

### Inventory

##### 1^st^ Degree

Carry Space

How much room the character has to carry things in.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Carry Weight

How much mass the character can carry.

# Systems

## Interaction

### Visual

##### 1^st^ Degree

Mode

Player can switch from FPS to PAC mode. The screen stays in place and
the mouse can be moved across the screen.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Perception

Objects and elements that can be interacted with will have a visual
indicator.

### Moves

##### 1^st^ Degree

Interact List

All actions are listed in a drop-down menu.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Observe

Look over the object or element for notable features

Speak

Speak to a person

##### 3^rd^ Degree

Pick Up

Add to inventory.

Loot/Pilfer

Open a container to see the content. It's pilfering if illegal.

Use Item

Use an item on it.

### Prose Box

##### 1^st^ Degree

Narration

Any plot of environment information is shown

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Observation

The character can observe objects and elements, showing information.

##### 3^rd^ Degree

Description

When the character performs an action, the effects are shown.

### Stats

##### 1^st^ Degree

View Distance

How Far forward the character can see.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Awareness

How well they observe their surroundings.

##### 3^rd^ Degree

Sharpness

How well they see objects and elements.

## Combat

### Moves

##### 1^st^ Degree

Actions

Happen when activated.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Reactions

Happen automatically after being hit based on character stats and
whether the character is acting.

##### 3^rd^ Degree

Stance

How the character is standing and what effects it has on combat.

#### Action

##### 1^st^ Degree

Basic Attack

The character can a basic swing attack with melee using stamina and a
shoot attack with ranged using ardor.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Extra Attack

The character can perform multiple attacks with differing effects, using
either stamina or ardor.

#### Reaction

##### 1^st^ Degree

Dodge

If a character is attacked while not attacking, they might dodge.
Contests offense.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Block

If a character is attacked and they have a shield, they might block.
Contests power.

##### 3^rd^ Degree

Parry

If a character attacks at the same time an attack connects, they might
parry. Contests damage.

#### Stance

##### 1^st^ Degree

Effects

Characters can change stance, they give different effects, good and bad.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Preparation

They can have an unlimited amount, but can ready only a select number

##### 3^rd^ Degree

Addition

Characters can learn stances

### Stats

##### 1^st^ Degree

Offense

How accurate the attack was.

Power

How strong the attacks force was.

Damage

How much pain an injury the attack causes.

Dex Speed

How fast the attack is performed

Defense

How difficult the target is to hit. Compared to Offense. Range
increases.

Protection

How fortified the target is. Compared to Power.

Threshold

How much of a flat number is subtracted from health damage done.
Compared to Damage.

Damage Resistance

How much of a percentage is subtracted from damage done. Compared to
Damage.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Critical

Damage done with a critical hit, bypasses threshold. Does an effect as
well.

Evasion

How likely the target is to dodge. Compared to Offense.

Guard

How strong the target's block is. Compared to Power.

Fence

How effective a parry is. Compared to Damage.

##### 3^rd^ Degree

Damage Effect

-Puncture: bypasses resistance once it passes the threshold.

-Maim: Permanently lowers maximum health until cured.

-Bleed: Does health damage whenever the character does an action but
slowly lowers in potency until it wears off.

-Poison: Does health damage over time but slowly lowers in potency until
it wears off.

-Burn: Does maiming damage over time but slowly lowers in potency until
it wears off.

-Injury: Resting doesn't restore the character's health.

-Stagger: Stops the character from reacting.

-Paralyze: Stops the character from acting.

-Knockback: Pushes a character back.

-Stumble: Brings the character to the ground.

Effect Resistance

How much of a percentage is subtracted from the chance that the effect
happens.

## Speaking

### Categories

##### 1^st^ Degree

Conversation

Only specific selected responses.

Only main or major NPCs

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Questioning

Ask more information about specific topics.

All NPCs, but main ones use conversation primarily.

### Conversation

##### 1^st^ Degree

Choices

PC selects from predetermined responses.

Branching

Some choices will effect the flow of conversation, others effect the
character's affinity towards the character.

Portrait

The character speaking has a portrait. This shows their general mood and
reaction.

Narration

The character's actions are narrated alongside their speech.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Visibility Checks

Some choices have a check attached to them that decides what choices
there are.

Capability Checks

Some choices have a check attached to them that decides whether the
choices succeed in their intended effect.

##### 3^rd^ Degree

Insight Checks

Effects how different visual elements of the UI appear.

-Deception

-Emotion

### Questioning

##### 1^st^ Degree

Choices

Player can choose from a list of phrases. These often have checks.

Enter Phrase

Player can type any phrase in response into the prompt area.

NPC response

The NPC says something, often a line to a paragraph.

If the character doesn't have a custom response for the phrase, it will
respond with a logical generic response based on the character.

### Stats

##### 1^st^ Degree

Rhetoric

Effects Capacity Checks

Wit

Effects Visibility Checks

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Disposition

How NPCs react to the character by default, influenced by reputation.

Intuition

Effects Insight Checks

##### 3^rd^ Degree

Belief Index

List of ideas that a character has internalized and that now define part
of their personal moral and reason system.

Core Belief: A belief that a character holds as true no matter what.

Ethical Belief: A belief that a character holds as true unless convinced
otherwise.

Logical Belief: A belief that a character holds as true unless shown
proof otherwise.

\- Learned through an adventure.

\- Written into a backstory.

\- Fabricated with a lie (check).

\- Remembered using a skill (check).

Check Stats

Social: Disposition, Rhetoric, Wit, Intuition, Belief

Main: Lineage, Discipline, Background, Attribute, Skill

Extra: Class, Trait, Ability, Aptitude, Fact, Goal

RP: Wealth, Savings, Debt, Spending, Bounties, Reputation, Title

## Feats

### Basics

##### 1^st^ Degree

Movement

How well the character can move around the terrain.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Stealth

Moving about undetected.

### Movement

##### **1^st^ Degree**

Walking

How fast the character moves on land.

Lock Smashing

Locks can be smashed.

##### **2^nd^ Degree**

Jumping

How high and far the character can jump.

Swimming

Whether the character can move in water and how fast they can.

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Climbing

Whether the character can climb certain surfaces and how fast they can.

Lifting

Whether the character can lift and push certain objects.

### Stealth

##### **1^st^ Degree**

Visibility

Determining whether characters see others.

Pilfer

Stealing objects in the environment

##### **2^nd^ Degree**

Light

How well the light hides a visible character.

Pick Pocket

Stealing objects from characters

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Sound

How well the NPCs hear a character moving and acting.

Awareness

Determining whether characters knows another character is hiding.

### Stats

##### **1^st^ Degree**

Move Speed

How fast they move.

##### **2^nd^ Degree**

Might

Ability to exert strength.

Finesse

Ability to physically adapt to and act on surroundings.

Tact

Ability to perform gentle hand maneuvers.

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Presence

How visible the character is based on light level.

Nimbleness

How audible the character is based on speed.

Vision

The vision of the mark.

-Blind: Cant see.

-Normal: Can see under normal lighting when not obscured.

-Dark: Can see regardless of lighting when not obscured.

-Extra: Agent is visible regardless of lighting and obscurity.

Hearing

The hearing of the mark.

-Deaf: Cant hear.

-Normal: Can hear.

## Tinkering

### Categories

##### **1^st^ Degree**

Real Time

All actions are real time and allow for the character to be attacked.

Picking Locks

Ability to open locked objects.

Maintain

Ability to keep item quality high.

Heal

Ability to increase Health, Stamina, Ardor or any combo of them.

##### **2^nd^ Degree**

Repair

Ability to repair broken objects.

Arm Trap

Lay a trap for enemy.

Remedy

Ability to treat injuries and cure illnesses and gain positive effects.

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Disarm Trap

Disarm a trap and collect it for own use.

One must just use a probe on the main mechanism of the trap.

Otherwise, just tripping it from a safe location works.

Constructing

Ability to create objects.

### Stats

##### **1^st^ Degree**

Deftness

Ability to use hands skillfully.

Medicine

Ability to heal, treat, and cure

##### **2^nd^ Degree**

Craft

Ability to work with objects.

## Exploration

### Money

##### **1^st^ Degree**

Savings

Non-wealthy characters start with a set amount of money.

Barter

Trade money for objects or objects for money. Not everyone will accept
everything

##### **2^nd^ Degree**

Decentralization

There are different currencies and different sources of circulation such
as banks.

Wealth

Wealthy characters have infinite money, instead limited by how much they
can spend a day.

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Spending

The character must find a place to sleep, if they can't afford to, they
have to sleep in the wilds.

Debt

The character can loan money from different sources. Each handles unpaid
debt differently.

### Crime

##### **1^st^ Degree**

Bounties

Crossing different groups will make you wanted.

##### **2^nd^ Degree**

Trial

Some governments may give you a trial.

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Bounty Hunters\
People sent to get you, dead or alive.

Punishments

There are different punishments for different crimes

-Fining/Reparation: Paying money

-Imprisonment: Staying in prison

-Servitude: Serving until debt is payed

-Injury: Getting permanently altered for the negative

-Outlawing: Living without the protection of the law

-Death: Being killed (Game Over)

-Exile: Being forced out the land (Game Over)

-Public Humiliation: Enduring reputation-damaging humiliation

### Reputation

##### **1^st^ Degree**

Reputation

How the character is received by different NPCs based on who they
associate with. Respect has two axis, Respect and Favor.

General

How the world feels about the character.

Individual

How a specific person feels about the character.

##### **2^nd^ Degree**

Class

How a specific class of people feels about the character.

Title

Titles the character can get by meeting the conditions.

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Community

How a specific location feels about the character.

-City Clique

-Town

-Network

Faction

How a specific group feels about the character.

-Political

-Religious

-Industrial

### Party

##### 1^st^ Degree

Member

The Player character travels with multiple other characters. Each has
their out thoughts, stories, and limits.

Control

Companions can be controlled by the player.

Party Limit

How many people can be in the character's party at once

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Party Rally

How willing the party is to follow you when they don't want to.

# Items

## General

### Type

##### 1^st^ Degree

Equipment

Used for specific situation.

Money

Used for trading.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Weapon

Held in hand and used for combat. Has a selection of attacks based on
type.

Armor

Worn on body and modifies stats.

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Consumables

Heals, buffs, and applies effects.

Ammunition

Fuel for weapons.

### Information

##### 1^st^ Degree

Repair

Weapons degrade over time and need repair.

-Tools

-Similar Weapons and Tools

-Parts

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Identification

Some items need to be identified to know what they are and what they do.

Stats

Weight:

Size:

Stack-ability:

Value:

## Weapons

### Stats

##### 1^st^ Degree

Accuracy Mod

Speed Mod

Range

How close the enemy must be to be hit by the weapon.

-Melee; Only spaces immediately beside them.\
-Pole; Melee range and 1 space further.\
-Short; Melee range and up to 10 spaces.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Power Mod

Damage Mod

Critical Mod

Handedness

How many hands are needed to wield the item.

-1 Hander; Must use one hand to wield this weapon.

-2 Hander; Must use two hands to wield this weapon.

-½ Hander; Can use one hand to wield or two hands to gain additional
effects.

-On Hander; Can use in non-dominant hand to gain a free attack with that
weapon.

-Off Hander; Can use in non-dominant hand to gain effects.

Requirements

Stat levels needed to use without penalty

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Attacks

Every weapon, by type and specific to that weapon, has a list of
possible attacks.

Properties

-Throwing (Melee); Can be thrown.

-Small (Melee/Dexter/Gun); Can be hidden from view.

-Exploding (Dexter/Gun); Weapon will explode doing damage within a
certain radius.

-Charging (Gun); Charge to double damage.

-Loud (Gun); Breaks stealth.

Ammo Type

Ammo Capacity

### Type List

##### 1^st^ Degree

Melee

Ranged

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Fist

Blade

Blunt

Polearm

Shield

Dexter

Gun

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Fist

-Knuckle

-Hands

-Claw

Blade

-Dagger

-Dueling Sword

-Broad Sword

Axe

-Broad Axe

-Battle Axe

-Sword Axe

Blunt

-Mace

-Staff

-Flail

Polearm

-Spear

-War Pick

-Halberd

Shield

-Breaker

-Buckler

-Shield

Dexter

-Bow

-Sling

Thrown

-Knife

-Javelin

Mechanical

-Crossbow

-Crank Gun

Strong

-Revolver

-Sniper

-Scattergun

Repeater

-Pistol

-Rifle

-Shotgun

## Armor

### Stats

##### 1^st^ Degree

Evasion Mod

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Protection Mod

Threshold Mod

Resistance Mods

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Properties

-Heavy; Can't Dodge

### Type List

##### 1^st^ Degree

Clothes

Armor

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Headdress

Helm

-Cap

-Helmet

-Great Helm (Heavy)

Hats

Armor

Cloth

-Thorax

-Gambeson

-Light Mail

Mail

-Leather Armor

-Bringantine

-Link Mail (Heavy)

Plate

-Banded Armor

-Half Plate (Heavy)

-Full Plate (Heavy)

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Masks

Gloves

Shoe

# UI#

## Action

### FPS

##### 1^st^ Degree

Compass

The compass shows which direction the PC is facing.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Prose Box

Observation prints a description of the interactable into the text box.

### PAC

##### 1^st^ Degree

Clicker

When in mouse mode, the Player can click on interactables and choose
from a list of interactions.

Drop Down Box

a

### Combat

##### 1^st^ Degree

Resources

A

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Moves

A

Reaction

A

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Stance

A

### Stealth

##### 1^st^ Degree

Light

A

Sound

A

## Speaking

### Conversation

##### 1^st^ Degree

Portrait

a

Dialogue

S

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Choices

a

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Portrait

S

Highlights

a

### Questioning

##### 1^st^ Degree

Dialogue

The text appears in response to a key phrase, every character has a
different response to that phrase.

Phrases

Phrases can either be picked from a list, clicked as a hyperlink within
the reply, or entered in.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Search Box

Search the list of

Response

A

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Portrait

S

### Exchange

### Loot

##### 1^st^ Degree

List

s

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Info

s

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Filter

s

### Barter

##### 1^st^ Degree

Worth

s

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Modifier

s

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Barter

s

### Pilfer

##### 1^st^ Degree

Difficulty

s

## Character Sheet

### Information

##### 1^st^ Degree

General

Age, Gender, Lineage, Backstory

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Story

Facts, Aptitudes, Class, Goals

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Development

Discipline, Traits, Abilities

### Stats

##### 1^st^ Degree

Resources

Health, Stamina, Ardor

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Attributes and Skills

a

Derived

a

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Wellness

Energy, Nourishment, Injuries, Illnesses

### Journal

##### 1^st^ Degree

Observations

A

Dialogue

The journal takes notes from everything said and

##### 2^nd^ Degree

Documents

T

Quests

A

Goals

A

Individuals

a

Criminal

A

Financial

A

Community

a

Faction

a

Reputation

a

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Player Additions

The player can add notes and search for terms.

Title

a

### Map

##### 1^st^ Degree

Local

The map shows everyone in a level, and shows the player character, the
player can make notes on the map for later.

##### 2^nd^ Degree

District

T

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Land

T

### Inventory

##### **1^st^ Degree**

General

A

Finances

A

##### **2^nd^ Degree**

Attire

A

Weapon

A

##### **3^rd^ Degree**

Party

A
